Wow, thanks for coming.
You guys do know there's a
Core Imaging session right now,
don't you?
Hi, welcome to session 132,
Cocoa Animation Techniques.
My name is Troy Stephens.
I'm a software engineer
on the AppKit team.
And today, I get to tell you about some
really neat stuff that we've
been working on for Leopard,
with the goal of making it very,
very easy for you to add
sophisticated animations and visual
effects to your Cocoa applications,
to your existing
view-based user interfaces.
So, animation can be a lot of fun,
adding animation to your apps,
and you can and will go
completely nuts with this stuff.
It can also, however,
serve some useful user interface
purposes and provide good
user experience benefits.
And that's been part of the
motivation behind our developing
this technology and making it easier
for you to do these kinds of things.
Animation can make your
application feel more adaptive,
live, dynamic, responsive.
And it can put that kind
of last bit of polish,
that extra fit and finish on your app,
that tells users that you've
paid attention to every detail,
and that you really want them to have
a highly interactive user experience.
But in addition to stuff like that,
that's just sort of endears users
to your apps in a general way,
you can do things like help
users maintain context.
In Panther, we added animated scrolling,
for example,
for web views and mail messages,
and now you may notice
in your Leopard seat,
it's turned on for all scroll views.
So, you know,
when I'm reading a web page,
if the page jumps when I page down,
I kind of got to figure out
where I was and pick up,
but with animated scrolling,
my eyes can kind of track
along as the page is moving,
and I can pick up where I left off
much more easily and continue reading.
Another use for animations is to
alert users to state changes that they
themselves did not necessarily initiate.
For example,
the iChat buddy list is one of the
first places we really saw this,
where, you know,
you have buddies coming online,
going offline,
and you kind of want to get a visual cue.
That something's going on there,
you know, "Oh,
dad's online now," or something,
or somebody just left,
but you don't want to
be interrupted with it.
It's something you can be
sort of peripherally aware of,
and animation works beautifully
in that particular situation
to sort of give you a cue that
something's going on off to the side.
Another thing you can do with
animation is indicate sort of a
tentative response to a user action
that hasn't been committed yet.
An example of this would be when
you go to customize your toolbar,
and you're dragging a new
item in or taking an existing
item and moving it around,
you'll notice that all
the other toolbar items,
sort of move around in a
live animated way to show,
you know, "Okay,
this is how we're going to move out of
the way to make room for the item that
you're about to drop." So if you drop it,
you know where it's going to go.
You can do that kind of thing
arguably without animation,
but it just looks a lot slicker
and feels a lot more responsive
when animation is used.
Lastly,
another thing you might want to do
is indicate that some major change
of interaction mode is occurring.
Like front row, for example.
If you take out your Apple remote,
and you click the menu button on it,
then everybody else who's
seated in your section will see
their desktop slowly fade away,
and the notes they're taking will fade
away as the front row UI comes on.
And it gives users a cue that, "Okay,
we're leaving the desktop now.
We're leaving that set of metaphors
and that means of user interaction,
and things are going to
work a little differently.
We're going to interact with the machine,
with the remote,
and so forth." So these are just
a few examples to give you some
ideas of the kinds of things that
you might be able to find uses for
animation for in your own applications.
So today we're going to look at
some new animation support that
we've been working on for AppKit.
We'll start off with a demo to sort
of seed a picture in your minds
of just what kind of stuff we're
talking about being able to do.
Then I'll go into a design overview
of sort of the hows and whys of how we
decided to present this functionality.
And we'll look at the new API in
detail so that you'll be able to
go away and start using this stuff
right away on the Leopard Seed.
And I'll close with some usage
tips and performance tips for
how to get the most out of this.
So if we could go to demo D please.
We'll start with our first demo.
And I know you guys have seen a lot of
sort of image browser apps this week.
So I apologize.
I have another image
browser app to show you.
But I made this one
look a little different.
So in this one, the user's presented with
a set of images as slides.
And each of these-- this is
all done using Cocoa Views.
Each slide is actually a
small subtree of views.
I've got the custom view
that draws the slide carrier,
the sort of white, rounded corner,
bezier path,
using a subtle NSGradient there.
NSGradient is a handy new class
that's been added to AppKit.
So yeah, it's much easier to do that now.
No need to drop down to Core graphics
and write lots of C code.
And in fact,
the background here is a very
subtle gradient from dark
gray to black up at the top.
So we've got a simple container view
that just sort of draws the slide shape.
We've got a-- up here
at the top of each one,
we've got a simple button that is
a checkbox style button that both
displays the title and enables me
to check off a slide as selected.
And then we've got a couple of ordinary
NSText fields down at the bottom that
display some information about the image,
what type it is,
and what its pixel dimensions are.
So far,
this is all pretty ordinary Cocoa Views.
And I've added some sort
of different layouts,
different ways we can sort
of scatter the slides around.
We can arrange them in sort of
an infinite loop configuration,
arrange them in a circle.
And this is just sort of setting views.
All I'm doing in each of these
cases is computing the frame origin
that I want and the frame rotation
for each of the views and putting
them in the new configuration.
So so far,
this is all ordinary Cocoa Views stuff.
But what's interesting here is that
these views are not being composited
into the window via the usual means.
Behind the scenes,
AppKit is creating automatically a
layer tree that mirrors everything
in the view subtree here from the
content view here all the way on down
the view hierarchy to the leaves.
So we've got views and layers.
And the significance of having
view content in layers is that
each view gets its own layer.
Each layer has its own backing store,
therefore you have
pre-cached view content.
And it's very easy-- once you
have pre-rendered content,
it's very easy to move
stuff around efficiently.
And if we want to animate stuff,
I can give this a non-zero duration here.
And instead of sending things
immediately to their new locations--
let's say I want to relay these out--
I can just sort of have them smoothly
animate to their new position.
And one of the take points here--
And I'll just let that run automatically.
So I'm just cycling among
the different configurations.
And this is running very slowly,
so you can get a clear picture of it.
But this can run fast if you want.
You want half-second animations.
You can make people a little seasick.
There we go.
[Transcript missing]
So, you know,
you want to pick a transition and that
just works and it's very little code.
Part of the take-home point
is this is very little code.
And this is all running on the
very same leopard seed that you
guys have received this week
that you have in your possession.
So this is all stuff that you can
begin experimenting with today.
So if we could go back to the slides,
I'd like to get into how you can do that.
So a quick design overview
of what we've decided to do.
You may have had the chance to attend
the Core Animation session yesterday.
If not, I'll give a quick recap
of Core Animation.
Core Animation is a powerful
new framework and foundation for
compositing and animating of content.
Core Animation is an Objective-C API.
It's part of the Quartz Core framework.
Its development code name was LayerKit,
so you'll hear me say
LayerKit occasionally by mistake.
And that's why all the classes
have the LK prefix in the names.
The most basic unit of currency that you
work with in Core Animation is layers.
Layers are in many ways
analogous to views.
The layer API was patterned
after the view API.
And layers are like these sort of
blank canvases that you can put
whatever content you want into.
They are nestable in a hierarchy.
Each has its own local coordinate
system defined in terms of its
parent's coordinate system.
There's some limited support for
event handling and that sort of thing.
So it's very much like
working with a view hierarchy,
except you don't have this
implementation of all the Aqua controls.
Basically,
layers are just like an NSView.
They don't have any inherent behavior,
but they have sort of potential behaviors
and a way that they work together.
As I mentioned,
you have per-layer content buffering,
so you can do very efficient
kinds of animations and applying
effects and that sort of thing.
That's very important.
And it's part of how
Core Animation provides all
these performance improvements
over standard view animation.
And it has this fantastic implicit
asynchronous animation model where
you basically set new properties on
things and it's implied that you get an
animation to the end of the animation.
So you can change the new target
state rather than the changes
taking effect immediately.
So that's a really powerful,
easy way for you to
implement animations to say,
I want something to animate.
You just change properties.
Core Animation comes with a
very expressive set of animation
description classes that we'll look
at in detail that let you specify
all kinds of different animations.
It encapsulates a set of layout
algorithms that you can use as
layout managers to specify how
sublayers are positioned when
their super layer changes size.
And it provides you access
to the full-duty animation.
You can have a full range
of core image effects,
shadow effects on layers.
You can have masks on
layers and so forth.
And one of the greatest potentials
that Core Animation has going
forward is to be sort of a unifying
graphics technology that helps
bring together Quartz rendering
with other sort of sub-universes
of rendering like GL rendering,
QuickTime,
Quartz Composer content rendering
that previously have had a really
hard time coexisting together.
You know, if you have some
GL rendering in a window,
that's usually going to
a hardware accelerator.
You know, if you have some
GL rendering in a window,
that's usually going to
a hardware accelerator.
And it doesn't play well
with having controls on top
of it and stuff like that.
So stuff that has been really
hard to do before is going to be
much easier to do in the future.
On the other hand,
there are a number of things
that Core Animation does
not attempt to provide.
Core Animation sits in Quartz
Core down below the AppKit layer.
And among other things,
it is not an implementation
of the Aqua Control set.
It's not a user interface toolkit.
It is an Objective-C API,
so in that sense it's somewhat
object-oriented and high-level.
But it does not... It does not
attempt to supplant AppKit or
do the job of providing all
these standard controls for you.
Likewise, you get no built-in
accessibility support with it.
Other things like printing support,
you can, I found out, you can,
I found out in the
Core Animation session yesterday,
render a layer tree to a PDF,
so there is support for output
to things other than the screen.
But AppKit has this whole
complex printing architecture
that provides you with a lot
more when it comes to printing.
Complex event handling.
There are some basic event handling
capabilities in Core Animation.
But AppKit has all these long-standing
paradigms for things like input focus,
the responder chain,
that give you lots of power
when it comes to event handling
and lots of flexibility.
So that's another thing AppKit provides.
Drag and drop support,
support for things like tooltips,
cursor recs, tracking recs.
These are all just sort of higher-level
things that you expect more from a
user interface toolkit like AppKit.
So we've got a lot of power
down in Core Animation.
And we want to make
it really easy to use.
And so the thing we wanted to
do going forward was enable you
to get the best of both worlds.
And so what we've
decided to do in AppKit,
our goals were, first,
make animation easy and fun.
So try to minimize the syntax,
make this really easy
to take advantage of.
Leverage Core Animation's performance
and feature benefits as much as possible.
And extend the same sort of convenient
and powerful compositing and animation
model to you for use with views.
So that you can continue to work
with views and not even worry about
layers unless you really want to.
So that you can continue to work
with views and not even worry about
layers unless you really want to.
or need to.
In hand with doing that,
we've added a set of new visual
effect properties to NSView,
like the shadows I demonstrated,
like the ability to apply core
image filters to the content
of a view that it's rendered.
All of that stuff was inspired
by the new properties on layers
that we didn't have in Views,
so we said, okay, well,
let's bring this up to the
View level and use Core Animation to
do all of the rendering.
Likewise,
AppKit will manage all the layer creation
and refresh for you automatically.
There is,
apart from one line of code in that demo
where I throw the master switch and say,
OK,
I want everything in this view subtree to
be rendered and animated using LayerKit,
there's not one other line of
code in that app that has to worry
about the existence of layers.
This is all happening automatically.
AppKit takes care of it.
When a view needs redisplay,
the view gets redrawn into
its layer and so forth.
And AppKit manages the layers for you.
However, if you do want to start
meddling with layers,
if you want access to properties that
layers have that we maybe haven't
mirrored up to the AppKit API,
some of the specialized stuff like 3D
transforms like you saw in the State of
the Union demo and the building,
the city of album art,
that kind of stuff, you can get out the
layers if you want to.
And you can even replace them
with your own layers if for some
reason you wanted to do that.
Likewise,
if you just want to work with layer
trees in some particular part of your
window and you just want to build your
own layer tree and have us render it,
you can do that.
You just set up a view to
render a layer tree and you say,
"Here's your root layer
and we'll do that for you."
So here's how mirroring of
view content into layers works,
just to sort of give us a mental picture.
I've got my slide,
which is really sort of a subtree
of views that's broken down
into the slide carrier view.
And then I've got a button in there.
I've got an image view,
and I've actually got a couple
of text fields in the example.
So we've got this view subtree to draw,
and AppKit sees this and sees that it's
in a descendant of a view that's switched
on for Core Animation-backed rendering.
So AppKit goes ahead and creates
when it's time to render.
We create a layer for
each view automatically,
and the layers start out empty.
We size them to match the views.
And when it's time to render, we say,
okay, we've got to push the
content into the layers.
So automatically,
the views get their content
rendered into the layers.
As far as the views are concerned,
they don't have to do anything special.
Their draw rect gets called
when it's time to draw.
The view just draws as usual,
except that AppKit behind the scenes
has diverted that drawing into the
layers graphics context so that
that drawing can be individually
buffered and cached for later use.
And then the layer tree,
when it's time to draw the window,
we composite the layer
tree using Core Animation.
So how do you switch this on?
This is neat.
How do you turn it on?
We want to make this real easy.
So you choose a root view,
and you can do this for more
than one view in a window.
And you just say, set wants layer, yes.
And that's how you
throw the master switch.
And then AppKit takes care
of the rest after that.
So when you do this for a view,
it has the following
consequences and implications.
AppKit mirrors the view subtree
automatically into a layer tree for you.
So we'll create the layer tree.
We'll update it as needed and so on.
When you change properties of the views,
we'll change the corresponding
layer properties.
That all happens automatic.
Views draw into their layers
via drawRect as before.
When you do setNeedsDisplay for a view,
that carries over to the
view's corresponding layer.
So OK,
you've changed some of your view content.
Your model has changed,
and you need to redraw some of the view.
OK, so I need to do setNeedsDisplay
in this rect or setNeedsDisplay
for the whole view.
We note that, OK,
we need to do the same for the layer.
And so when we redraw the view,
we'll refresh the layer content.
View property changes map to
layer properties automatically.
AppKit implements animation
of non-layer properties.
So this is something
that we wanted to add.
We wanted you to be able to animate more
than just the core geometric properties
that you get for layers and enable you
to animate just about anything you want,
including your own properties.
And we'll see how to do that shortly.
Finally,
any setting of this flag further down
in the View subtree will be ignored.
So we look for the root-most
view in an ancestor chain
that has once layer enabled.
And that will be the view from
which we start doing layer tree
rendering all the way down.
I mentioned some new view
properties that we've added,
including visual properties.
Every NSView now has an alpha value.
This is named to match
the NSWindow property,
and it works exactly the same.
Once the view has drawn its content,
this is the overall opacity with which we
will composite the view into the window.
You could set it to zero and effectively
make a view invisible if you want.
You can vary it, and you can animate it.
Likewise, views have filters.
You have the ability to specify
any core image filters that you
want for the view's content,
for the background behind the view,
and for-- actually,
you can specify any of the core
image compositing filters if you
don't want source over compositing.
Most of the time, you're not going to
be interested in that,
but the content filters and background
filters are more interesting,
because those are arrays of filters.
Those are array-typed values.
So you can actually specify maybe
you want to sepia tone and then blur
and then do some other halo effect.
You can do that.
You just specify an
array of three filters,
and boom, off you go.
And we automatically-- AppKit or
actually Core Animation under the hood
will link those filters together for
you and run your content through them.
You can specify a per-view shadow,
much as you can specify
a per-layer shadow.
And at the AppKit level,
since we already had NSShadow
as a convenient encapsulation
for expressing shadows,
we used that as the type.
Also, we provided some new
API for animation control.
You can-- each view has
an animations dictionary,
and each window also has an animations
dictionary that you can use to specify
per instance what kinds of animations
you want for different properties.
And we'll look at that in a bit later.
And then finally,
the view's use of Core Animation for
rendering and for animating is
controlled by that wants layer flag.
And then you also have the ability
to get and potentially set the layer.
So there's a layer getter,
and there's a set layer method also.
So we're starting to
get into API inevitably,
so let's just keep going.
So what we'll look at in this
session is how to animate your
views in Windows using the new API,
primarily focusing actually on views.
We'll look at how to initiate animations.
We'll look at view and window
properties that animate for
you automatically by default.
So you just have to specify
that you want animation and you
get some default parameters.
And we'll look at making your own
views custom properties animatable,
which you can do.
That was very important for us
to extend that to you so you can
do it with arbitrary properties.
of your own design.
We'll look at building animation
specifications of various kinds for,
I want a transition of
this particular type.
Or I want something to
animate from A to B,
but I want a particular
type of time curve on it.
So we'll look at how you express
the kind of animation you want.
And finally,
we'll look at applying filter effects
to view content and how that works.
So when we went to design this,
we went back to basics.
And we said, well,
what fundamentally is animation?
What does it mean to animate something?
Objects have properties, obviously.
Animation, when you think about it,
is really nothing more than varying
a property of an object over time,
rather than setting
that value immediately.
So when you set a target
value for a property,
you should be able to just say, OK,
I want this to go to there.
And it's here right now.
And go ahead and initiate an animation.
It should be really easy to do that.
So we provided default animation
parameters for all of the built-in
view and window properties
that you might want to animate.
And so animations just
sort of work when you say,
OK, animate to here.
There are opportunities given
to you to substitute different
parameters if you want different
kind of animation to happen,
different kind of timing.
And any animation,
as you saw in the demo,
that any new animation instructions
you give an object automatically
supersede any in-flight animations
for the object property.
We'll just start from where we are
now and move on to the new property.
So how do you set a target value?
How do you do this?
We spent a lot of time thinking about
what the API should look like for this.
Setting an immediate value,
like setting the frame of a view,
just looks like view, set frame, rec.
That's really simple.
And we wanted to keep it as close
as we could to that simplicity
without adding a lot of syntax.
So we thought about, well, you know,
we've got NSWindows set
frame animate method.
And so we could add an animate with a
bool parameter to each of the setters.
But then that becomes
an explosion of methods,
and that requires us to rethink KVC.
We didn't really want to do that.
So we said, well, how about if we,
what we ended up coming up with
is this concept of an animator.
So views and windows
have animator objects.
You can ask a view for its animator.
You can ask a window for its animator.
And then all you have to
do is message the animator
instead of the view or window.
So you insert a little extra syntax.
You say view animator set frame.
And that's all you have to do
to move a frame from A to B and
have it animate automatically.
And this goes for a lot
of other properties,
not just frame, frame rotation.
You want to set the alpha value
and have that fade to a new value.
You can do that, too.
So what exactly is an animator?
An animator is a proxy in a sense,
somewhat similar in concept, at least,
to NSProxy.
They aren't necessarily NSProxies.
It's a proxy for a target object
that has animatable properties
like a view or a window.
You can treat the proxy as if it was the
type of the object that you got it from.
So you get a views animator.
You can basically treat that
as if it was the view itself.
You can send it the same kinds of
messages the view can respond to.
And in fact, you can even pass it to code
that expects to get a view.
And that's perfectly valid.
And in fact, in the demo there,
all of that layout code was written
thinking that it's dealing with views.
I pass it a view, and I say,
layout subview's a view.
And I've got a circular layout function,
and I've got the infinite
loop layout function.
And those just think they're
dealing with views directly,
and the parameters are typed as NSView.
What I'm doing is passing an
animator in for the view that's
the container view there,
and then everything just sort of works.
So if you have existing layout code
that's written to just interact
with views and set their properties,
or not even layout code necessarily,
but code that sets properties on
a whole bunch of views in your UI,
you can animate those changes
now very easily just by
surrounding it with some context.
So when you send value
set messages to the proxy,
or the animator rather,
those can initiate animations.
And what happens when you do that,
first we search the target
object for an animation to use.
So the target object in
this case would be the view.
You get a views animator.
The target object is the view.
We search the view for, OK,
this property is going to animate.
What kind of animation should I use?
The property's name is the search key.
So if we're changing the frame origin,
the string coming in there
will be frame origin.
And that's what we'll use for the lookup,
or if it's frame or alpha value,
that sort of thing.
AppKit then checks the current
NSAnimationContext duration.
NSAnimationContext is a brand new
class that we've introduced in Leopard.
And I'm going to discuss
that in the next slide.
If we find an animation and we find
that the duration in the surrounding
animation context is greater than zero,
we initiate an animation to
the specified target value.
So those are the two things we need.
We need to find an animation to use.
If we don't find an animation,
we assume you don't want
the property animated.
If we find a zero duration,
we assume you don't want the
property animated either.
You don't want anything
animated within that context.
By default though,
AppKit provides default animations
for all the standard properties like
frame that you might want to animate.
And likewise,
we provide a default context
duration of a quarter second,
the same as Core Animation.
So you don't even have to worry
about setting those for a lot of
things and you just have to message
the animator and that's all you
have to do to get things to animate.
So if we find an animation,
duration is greater than zero,
we initiate an animation,
the proxy passes everything else through.
So that's sort of the general
proxy behavior that you expect.
Thank you.
So NSAnimationContext, I mentioned,
is a new class in Leopard.
And you can think of NSAnimationContexts
in a sense they're sort of
analogous to graphics contexts
in that they hold state.
And each thread has a
stack of these of its own.
And there's always a
current animation context,
just like there's always a
current graphics context.
And the properties are per context.
Right now,
the only property that NSAnimationContext
holds is the duration that is
used for implied animations.
For any animation that doesn't have
a duration explicitly specified,
we just take the duration
from the context.
And that makes it real easy to say, okay,
I'm going to animate a bunch of stuff.
I want a duration of one second.
I set that up in the context,
and then I just message animators
to change the properties.
And it just goes,
and everything has the same duration.
NSAnimationContexts are
somewhat analogous to
Core Animation's LKTransactions.
Which you will learn about if
you study the Core Animation API.
Typical usage for an animation
context is you begin a grouping,
and then you set the
duration that you want,
and then you do a bunch
of animation operations,
and you end the grouping.
So begin grouping is sort of like pushing
an animation context on the stack.
You get a fresh context that's
a copy of the previous one.
So by default,
you inherit the duration from the
context that was previously active.
And then you can say NSAnimationContext,
current context, set duration.
And here I'm setting it to a half second.
Because I'm going to
animate a bunch of stuff.
And I want all the animations
in that grouping to have a half
second duration by default.
You can nest these.
So you can group things such that
they have different durations.
And you can stack these
up as high as you want.
The two main significant points
for NSAnimationContext is that all
the animations that you initiate
within a grouping have the same
inherited implied duration.
And they all also implicitly
start at the same time.
They're guaranteed to start
in a synchronized way.
So when you end the grouping,
that's when we fire off the animation.
So it doesn't matter how long it
takes you to assemble this in code.
We will synchronize all the animations
unless they have explicit begin times.
So as I said, this is sort of a
general set of concepts.
We thought all objects
that have properties,
you may potentially want to be
able to animate those properties.
So we defined an
NSAnimatablePropertyContainer
protocol that's new in Leopard.
This is declared at the
top of NSAnimation.h.
So an animatable property
container is anything that has
properties that can be animated.
And right now in your Leopard seed,
views and windows both conform to the
NSAnimatablePropertyContainer protocol.
And we're considering extending that to
other classes potentially in the future.
So there are five methods that every
animatable property container implements.
You can get an animatable
property containers animator.
You can get and set a dictionary of
animations on a per instance basis.
There's also a class method,
default animation for key,
that you can override to specify on a
per class basis what sorts of animations
you want to respond to different kinds
of property changes for different keys.
And then there's animation for key,
which I'm going to discuss in a moment,
which is sort of a top level search
mechanism through which AppKit and
CoreAnimation find the animation to use.
So here's how the search process works,
just briefly.
Animation for Key is the
top-level method that we invoke.
So you've messaged an
animator and you've said,
you know, view animator, set frame,
and we say, okay,
they're trying to change the
frame through the animator.
Let's look for an animation
that corresponds to frame.
So we'll invoke Animation for Key.
The key name will be frame.
And we'll look in the object's
animations dictionary.
So per instance animation settings
override per class settings,
as you might expect.
If we don't find one there,
we'll check the object's class's
default animation for key method
and see if the class has specified
an animation for the frame key or
whatever the property key may be.
So again, Animation for Key first checks
the instance dictionary and then
calls default animation for key.
To make it so that you don't have to be
specifying these all the time explicitly,
for all of the default
view and window properties,
we've specified default simple
animations of interpolation
from the object to the key.
So we've got a lot of
different options here.
We've got the default animation for key,
and we've got the default
animation for key.
So we've got the default
animation for key,
and we've got the default
animation for key.
So we've got the default
animation for key,
and we've got the default
animation for key.
target from initial position to target.
So views frame origin, frame size,
frame rotation,
all the frame parameters are animatable,
all the bounds parameters.
So all the geometric stuff has
default animation specified for you.
You don't have to specify them.
Same for alpha value.
All the filter properties
for when subviews change,
by default, you get a fade animation.
And there's also this nsanimation
trigger order in and out set of
constants that you can pass in
that are defined in nsanimation.h.
And that's analogous to adding a view
to its super view or removing the view.
So you can specify,
if you want to specify a transition
for when the view is added
or when the view is removed,
you can do that sort of thing.
For nswindow,
currently alpha value and frame have
default animation specified for them.
But as I said,
we didn't want to limit you to just
animating the built-in kind of stuff
that we provide in the app kit,
all the standard properties
of views in Windows.
So you can enable animation of
your own properties that you
define in your own view subclasses.
The way to do this,
you can specify-- again,
you specify an animation either on a
per instance basis or more commonly,
you'll want to do it
on a per class basis.
In either case, you're mapping property
name keys to LK animations.
AppKit knows how to interpolate
some of the basic scalar types,
so floats, doubles, CG floats, NS points,
NS sizes, NS recs,
all the geometric aggregates
of those automatically.
So for all those types of properties,
anything that you have that's of one of
those types is potentially animatable.
And there are a couple
of steps to doing this.
First,
you want to have a KVC compliant setter
method that the animator proxy can find.
And so let's say I have a class, myView,
that has a border width property
that defines how thick the
border that the view draws is.
And it's really important that
I be able to animate this because
that enhances the user experience.
So I have a set border width.
At minimum,
I need a KVC compliant setter method,
set border width here,
that gets the new value, stores it,
and then starts the view as
needing redisplay in whatever
areas are affected by that.
So you should be doing this.
You need this already.
So really, there is no step one here.
Step two is to do something
like specify an animation,
either by overriding default
animation for key or setting it
in the per instance dictionary.
Normally,
you're writing a new view class.
And if you want a property
to just animate by default,
override default animation for key.
And then people don't have to
individually configure their instances.
And if they want to override and replace
the animation that you specified,
that's fine.
They can do that too.
But then they have a
default to fall back to.
So here, I've done this for border width.
I've overridden default animation
for key for my view subclass.
I'm looking for the border
width key to be coming in.
And if I see it,
I'm returning an LK basic animation.
And that is one of four
concrete animation classes
that Core Animation provides.
We're going to look at those
in detail to see what kinds
of animations you can specify.
This is just saying,
this is the most basic kind
of animation that there is,
as its name suggests.
It's an interpolation
with a standard curve.
And the duration is implied,
and so forth.
So I'm saying, basically,
all I'm saying is I want
border width to animate.
And then,
any time you override this method,
you want to invoke supers implementation
for any keys you don't recognize.
So we're doing that here at the bottom.
So what kinds of
animations can we describe?
We thought about this for a while.
And Core Animation has a very
rich set of expressive classes
for describing animations.
We thought about, well,
should we wrap this in the AppKit API?
And it turned out there was really
no clear benefit to doing so.
So what we've done is we've gone
ahead and used the LKAnimation
classes directly in the AppKit API.
So you just create LKAnimations.
And these are really
actually very simple classes.
They're very suitable for that
because they're basically massive
containers for properties,
properties that have
implied default values.
So at the root, you have LKAnimation,
which defines the basic
animation-- the basic properties
that all animations have.
And animation can have a timing function,
which basically gives you the opportunity
to specify some nonlinear progress
curve that the animation will follow.
And animation can also have a delegate.
So if you're interested in
knowing when the animation starts
and when the animation stops,
you can get callbacks, objc messages,
to your delegate by
wiring the delegate up.
From LKAnimation is derived
LKPropertyAnimation,
which is still a semi-abstract class.
It's the root class for animations
that animate properties,
things that have identifiable names.
So a property animation has
a key path that specifies
the property to be animated.
Normally,
you just leave the key path empty.
You just leave it to be implied.
Because when you message, say,
a view through its
animator to set its frame,
well, we know that frame is the key.
And we'll fill that in for you.
But what this lets you do is if
you explicitly set the key path,
you can specify that something
else is to be animated when that
change fires for that property.
So OK, when subviews changes,
maybe I want my frame to animate.
And you can use an explicit key path
setting to do that kind of thing.
You can specify whether animations
are additive or cumulative.
That's something that's mainly used
by core animation at this point.
And then so if we want
a concrete animation,
there's LKBasicAnimation.
This is the most common
kind you're going to use.
It's derived from LKPropertyAnimation.
Basic animation has a from value and
a to value and an optional by value.
And normally,
we just let this all be implied.
You're setting the to value when
you message the animator to set
the target value for the property.
The from value we get from where
the object is right now and
likewise for core animation.
So if you want to get a little
more complicated than that,
there's LKKeyframeAnimation,
which lets you specify basically a
series of waypoints so that you can have
something animate from A to B to C to D,
either geometrically.
Or in terms of any other
property that's animatable.
So a keyframe animation has
a set of waypoint values,
a set of key times,
a path that it can follow potentially.
You can specify an array of timing
functions now instead of a single overall
timing function and a calculation mode.
So those are sort of the two
animation types for most properties.
But you also want to be
able to have things like
transitions that you can express.
So there's the LKTransition class,
which is derived from LKAnimation.
A transition has a type,
which sort of expresses the overall
kind of transition you want.
There are four types
defined by layer kit,
rather by core animation.
The subtype expresses basically
the direction of the transition.
So you want something to slide from
left to right or top to bottom,
similar to the way you
pick things in Keynote.
You pick the overall transition
and then set parameters.
You can set start and
end progress if you want.
But normally those are just implied.
And you can set a filter.
Like I said, you can take any core
image transition filter,
which is one of a set of-- one of a class
of filters that QuartzCore provides,
and say, hey,
I want you to use this filter and
do a ripple transition or something.
When you specify that filter property,
that overrides the type and subtype,
and those are ignored.
So there's one other class,
LKAnimationGroup.
And that's basically like
an array of animations.
That gives you the opportunity to,
instead of specifying one animation,
maybe you want to aggregate a
whole bunch of them together.
So you can do that with LKAnimationGroup.
It just has one property.
It's the array of animations,
and that lets you define--
potentially complex compound
animations that have a whole bunch
of things in flight all at once.
So it looks like a lot
of complexity here,
a lot of stuff.
But really,
there are only four concrete classes
that you need to be concerned with.
And a lot of the time,
you're just going to be wanting a
basic animation or a transition.
And then maybe you start to
get more complex with the
groups and keyframe animations.
So, much like comedy,
animation is all about timing.
And up here you may have noticed
the LK timing protocol that
all LK animations conform to.
And we'll look at that in
detail because those timing
properties are very important for
defining how animations behave.
So, most basic property of all, duration.
How long do you want the
animation to execute for?
It's just an interval in
time value in seconds.
The default value is zero,
which implies that we're going
to get the duration from the
surrounding NS animation context.
Or if you're using
Core Animation directly,
you're going to get the duration
from the surrounding transaction.
Likewise, there's a begin time
that's implied to be,
well,
whenever I close the animation context.
That's when I want you to begin it,
whenever I'm initiating the animation.
But you can specify a begin time
in the future so that you can
explicitly get the duration.
So,
you can set an animation to auto-reverse,
so that gives you an easy way
to go from A to B and back to A.
And you can potentially
repeat that animation.
And that also works together
with the auto-reverse property.
So, you can set, there are a couple of
ways you can repeat.
You can either set a repeat count,
so I want this to repeat seven times.
Or you can specify a repeat duration,
which is how long overall do
I want this animation to run for.
You can specify a time
offset and a speed.
And this is what I want to do.
And these are parameters that are used
primarily by core animation right now
because you have the concept of nestable,
just the same as you have local
space coordinate systems for layers.
Each layer can have its own
local time coordinate system.
And this is also significant
for LK animation groups,
which is why it matters for
AppKit based animations.
Because you can define a group to have
its own local time coordinate system
that's convenient for you to work with.
You can scale time.
You can specify an offset.
There's also finally
a fill mode parameter.
That defines basically how things
end up when the animation terminates.
Does it stay in the layer tree,
in the render tree or not?
That's mainly used by core animation.
We don't really touch
that at the AppKit level,
but it's there.
So, as I mentioned,
you can define local time coordinate
systems within an animation group.
And this is just a
simple linear equation.
Normally your speed is one
and your time offset is zero.
So really it's just sort of
an offset calculation to get
down into the animation group.
So you can define an animation
group so that your time is zero.
And you don't have to worry about
what the surrounding absolute time is.
So just some handy stuff.
Most of the time you're just
interested in duration and begin time.
So how do we create these instances,
these basic animations?
We saw how you just create a basic
animation with default parameters,
LKBasicAnimation, animation.
It's that simple.
And animation, by the way,
is the defined factory method
for all classes of LKAnimation.
So it doesn't matter if you're creating
an LKTransition or an LKBasicAnimation,
you just send it an animation message.
This creates you an
auto-released instance.
Say you want to then take
that basic animation,
set a duration of one second.
Real simple, set duration 1.0.
You want to add a delegate, anim,
set delegate,
and specify your delegate object.
Creating animation
groups is pretty simple.
You just instantiate the animation group,
LKAnimationGroupAnimation,
and then you set the group's
animations as an array.
And the interesting thing about
animation groups is they don't
have any implied sequence,
really, although an array is
an ordered collection.
The sequence isn't really important here.
You can use an animation group to
have animations batched together
that execute simultaneously.
Like if you give them
all the same begin time.
You can have animations
that run sequentially.
Have anim2 begin after
anim1 has terminated.
You can set it up that way.
You can have animations overlapping
within an animation group.
You can have time gaps where
nothing's happening and you're waiting
for the next animation to start.
So you can define sort of the timeline
of an animation group however you want.
So that's a very powerful feature
for collecting animations together.
Transition animations
are easily specified.
Here in the top example,
we're creating an LKTransition.
We're setting its type
to LKTransitionMoveIn.
This is one of the four basic
built-in transition types that
CoreAnimation itself implements.
And we're setting the subtype
to transition from left.
So we want to move in
transition from the left.
And that's all it takes.
It takes three lines of
code to instantiate that.
If you want a CI filter-based transition,
you create an LKTransition again,
but then you're instantiating a
CI filter using all the normal means
of instantiating a CoreImageFilter.
Usually you just go filter with name.
You set the parameters
of the filter to default.
You override any other
parameters you want.
And then when you're done,
you just say animation set filter filter.
So you're setting the LKTransitions
to use that CI filter.
And that's really simple.
That's all it takes to do that.
Finally, what if you want to use this to
apply filter effects to views,
like for example the pointillized filter
that I used to highlight my view there?
Adding a content filter to
a view is really simple.
Again,
you instantiate the filter and that's
most of the work is configuring
the filter the way you want it.
Once you have the filter you want,
stick it in an array and you can
even do this in line because a view,
again,
can take an array of content filters.
It doesn't have to be just one filter.
You can specify as many as you want.
So if you want to apply
that effect immediately,
you just say,
"View Set Content Filters" filters,
pass it in the NSArray of
filters and blam,
the effect is applied immediately.
Or if you want the effect
to transition in over time,
you can say,
"View Animator Set Content Filters"
and then whatever filters,
if any, were applied before will sort of
transition from the way the view looks
now to the way the view is going to
look when the new filters are applied.
So again, in our slide example we had
highlighting with a pointillized filter.
You might want to use something a little
more subtle or a little more crazy.
But it's that easy.
That's all you have to do.
View set content filters
and you've got core image
filtering on your view content.
And we don't even have to re-render
your view when the filters change.
Because again, all of this content is
being cached in layers.
So this has enabled one of the many
great visual effect features that
are enabled when you're rendering
your views in layer-backed mode.
So finally,
some usage tips for this stuff.
How can you get the most
performance out of this?
And also, what kinds of things
should you look out for?
So there are a few behavioral
nuances to look out for.
A few things that are a little different
from standard view compositing mode.
For one thing,
the semantic difference between
sending set needs display to a view and
doing the same thing for an ancestor
for the same sort of area in the
window becomes more significant now.
It used to be views are all sort of
mushed together in the window backing.
But now, we're able to do that in a way
that's not so much a problem.
So if you dirty a certain
area of the window,
it doesn't really matter which view
you're talking to as long as there's
something occupying that area.
You can get away with it and the
content will all be redrawn to cover
the affected area of the window.
That becomes obviously something
that might not work very well.
Now that you have views,
each view has its own backing store.
So it's really important that
you dirty the stuff that actually
needs to redraw its content.
Not only so the content will be updated,
but also so we don't waste it.
We don't waste time re-rendering
content that actually is static
and doesn't need to be redrawn.
So be aware of that.
Another thing to note is that when
you're animating layer backed views
and you're animating properties such
as the geometric properties that we
use core animation to implement that
animation so it happens completely
without your app's intervention.
From your app's perspective,
those properties are changing
immediately in its own space.
So you say view animator
set frame blonde.
If your view is layer backed,
that has a slightly different semantic
than if you're in non-layer backed mode.
In non-layer backed mode,
the view is going to see its frame
gradually changed incrementally from
the current value to the new value.
If the view is layer backed,
that's going to happen immediately in
the application space because really
the animation in core animation,
most animations are just sort of a
visual treatment that happen off in
the render tree on a separate thread.
And they're not really something
that the app needs to be aware of.
So that's something to be aware of.
And one consequence of that is
if you're moving stuff around,
you're going to have a lot of
things that are going to be
in the way of the render tree.
So if you're moving stuff
around really slowly,
you have controls that you're
moving around that the user
may want to interact with,
you might want to disable those
controls during the course of a
long animation because the user
could be clicking around and,
you know, hey, you know,
it won't be clear at all to them that,
you know, the app thinks that the control
is in its destination when
it's going to take another,
you know, five seconds to get there.
Most of the time,
you're probably going to be using
short animations of a second or less,
maybe even a half second or
so because you want your app
to feel really responsive.
Amen.
Also, layer content is not only,
view content is not only cached
individually into individual layers,
but it's drawn axis-aligned in the
view's own local coordinate system.
So when you think about this,
this comes into play when
you have rotated views.
Even though the view may be rotated,
if it's in a layer-backed tree,
that rotation is all
implemented in LayerKit,
and the drawing that the view does
is actually aligned with the bitmap.
Even though the view is
rotated in the window,
all the drawing the view does is aligned
with the pixels of the backing store.
So that actually, in most cases,
is sort of a benefit.
That's part of why controls
look so much better.
If they're rotated,
they look so much better
in layer-backed mode,
mostly, than in non-layer-backed mode,
because everything just
sort of lines up as it is.
And effectively,
we're just then taking an image and
compositing that image in rotated.
And so you just get some
filtering and some anti-aliasing,
but things mostly look nice.
But in some cases,
you may have some negative
effects from that.
So something else to look out for.
And that's another reason,
in addition to performance issues,
in addition to the fact that
this has a performance cost,
compatibility with existing rendering is
another reason why we didn't just switch
this on for all your views in Windows,
because the output is slightly different.
A layer-backed view's content may
be composited in like an image.
That's basically what we're doing.
Views are not always going
to necessarily be backed.
They're not always going to be
backed by a bitmap backing store.
There's also a facility for layers
to have a display list backing store,
which is a much more compact
representation for vector-type art.
And currently, as of the seed,
we don't really have a way to take
advantage of this yet in AppKit,
but that's something that may
be coming as a way to specify,
"You know,
this view just draws a gradient,"
or "It just draws a box,
and it's really huge,
and it's not worth caching it
as a bitmap." But oftentimes,
things are just composited
in like an image,
so they'll have those sorts of
image compositing semantics.
In terms of getting the best
performance from layer-backed views,
the most important thing to do,
kind of as before,
is to avoid retraw as much as possible,
only now, to avoid retraw,
it pays off to isolate static
parts of your user interface.
So if you have stuff that is
animating and moving and changing,
and then you have some other
stuff that is static and doesn't
really need to be redrawn,
it just needs to be
recomposited into the scene,
it pays to potentially separate
that content into its own view.
So you have the dynamic content.
in one view and your static
parts in some other views.
Likewise,
you want to design by composing things
together and applying effects because
once you have content that's rendered,
it's real easy and cheap, as we've seen,
to sort of move it around
and apply effects to it.
But re-rendering content requires the
app's intervention and can take time.
So you can obviously have some sorts
of animations of that type going on,
but most of the time you want
to try to avoid redrawing
stuff when you don't have to.
Real common sense.
Also, it's good to optimize your
use of backing stores.
You don't want to have a view that has a
big margin around it and doesn't really
draw anything out to its full extents,
but just draws something inside
of itself and leaves a bunch
of blank space around it.
You're just using a layer backing store.
So try to crop your view content tightly
and you'll get better performance
that way and you'll be able to put
more objects in your scene that way.
Some possible future directions
for this stuff for Leopard and
beyond that we're thinking about.
We want to support additional
animatable value types.
So for example, colors.
You should be able to interpolate colors.
We're going to be adding stuff like that.
AppKit does not currently
interpret LK timing functions
and keyframe animations for your
own custom property animations,
although for layer backed properties,
that's automatically taken
care of by core animation.
So that we expect to be coming.
There will be some further performance
work on non-layer backed mode.
So all of this stuff,
and maybe it hasn't been
clear in the session so far,
all this animation stuff.
Also will work even if you're
not using layer backed views.
You can animate views frames by
talking to an animator proxy.
Part of the idea here was we wanted
you to be able to use the same
convenient syntax whether you have
a layer backed view tree or not.
So we're probably going to
do a little more improving
of the non-layer backed mode,
but right now the future really
is layer backed views for really
high performance animations,
we think.
So we've been focusing on that
and that's the kind of stuff
that you should be testing and
experimenting with in the seed.
and see,
and flip layer back view mode on and
start doing your animations that way.
There's some new API that was
mentioned in the Cocoa What's New talk
for taking a view full screen.
You've got a view and some
content and you want the user
to be able to interact with it,
filling up the screen.
We want to be able to have
transition effects applied to that.
There's a provision for transition
effects in there that's not
yet implemented in the seed,
but we'd like to be able to add that
so you can get a nice smooth transition
when you're going into full screen mode.
Integration with other
graphics technologies,
as I mentioned, such as OpenGL,
Quartz Composer, and QuickTime.
There's a lot of potential
here in Core Animation.
This is one of the most powerful
graphics technologies that we've
had come along on MacOSX.
And in fact, I've got a second demo,
if we could go back to Demo D,
to give you an idea of what kind of
stuff is going to be possible here.
So I've got my slides demo.
And it's got this nice gradient
background and everything.
And yeah, an NSGradient is nice,
and that's fun to be able to draw.
But you know what?
If I wanted to be able to
have something else arbitrary,
like a Quartz Composer composition
behind it or something.
So I turn that on.
And when I restart the app,
it's going to work.
Hmm.
There we go,
we got a little bit of a stall.
Let me quit and restart
and this will be happier.
The leopard's a little unhappy today.
OK.
This is a work in progress, by the way.
OK, starting this up new.
When in doubt, get out of the car,
close the doors, reopen the doors,
get back in the car, restart the engine.
And let's see.
OK, here we go.
OK,
so we've got a quartz composition here.
You know, we've got some arbitrary
views on top of it.
These happen to be sort of custom views,
drawing these slide shapes.
But they really could be anything.
We could put sliders here.
We've got the ability to have all kinds
of different app kit controls there.
In fact, I've got another little
test app here we can run.
And this is a much more
useless app except for just
testing the animation stuff.
So here I've got a quartz
composition in the background.
And I've got just a bunch of
different app kit controls.
And these are all
layer-backed views here again.
That's how we can,
I mean we wouldn't be able to do
this without layer-backed views.
There's no way to really have
conventional view drawing on top
of a quartz composition or any
other type of OpenGL rendering,
anything else that goes to a
hardware surface because the surface
normally floats over the window.
So there's, this was something that was
previously very hard to do.
Now you're in the future
going to have to do it again.
And you're going to be able to have,
you know, you want to put a slider
on top of your movie view.
We're looking to make that kind of
thing really easy to do so you don't
have to go to these sort of heroic
lengths to do that kind of stuff.
So all these controls sort of work,
you know.
I can slide the slider.
I can click the buttons.
Let's see, I've got a color well,
you know, I can pick around in there.
It's live.
It's interactive.
You may notice as I'm
mousing over the views,
I've got sort of a halo filter there.
You can sort of see it there.
I've got sort of a bloom
filter that I'm applying there.
And again,
the controls are all sort of interactive.
They just work.
Text fields aren't quite
working yet well in the seed.
We've got a fixed forthcoming for that.
But most of the other controls, you know,
they just sort of magically work.
And if you want to animate them
using layer backed animations,
you know, that works too.
I can turn off use of layer kit here.
And now we're just going to go to
a static image because now we can't
do the quartz composition anymore.
And
I'm animating using the exact same APIs.
The views have no idea that
they're animating differently.
And you can see, you know, it works.
I can talk to the animator
and set a frame target.
And all the retargeting stuff works, too.
But it's just not quite as smooth.
It's a little chunkier, right?
So if we go back to LayerKit backed mode,
you know, things just kind of flow.
They're much smoother,
mainly because the app isn't involved.
You know, once your view content
is rendered into layers,
then Core Animation is moving
stuff around behind the
scenes on a separate layer.
And your app is free to do
other stuff on its main thread,
on its run loop.
So, you know,
this is the kind of stuff that
we see coming in the future.
And we hope to make it
much easier to do this.
Now, the adding of the quartz
composition here in the background,
that was actually done using
API that's on your leopard seed.
And what I did is
I explicitly got a LK quartz,
sorry, a QC composition layer.
So there's a LK layer subclass
that is exposed as part of the
public API in the quartz composer
framework that you can instantiate.
And I've substituted that layer.
I've used the set layer API that's on
views to substitute my own layer in
place of the layer that AppKit would
otherwise automatically create.
And I just say, okay,
I want you to create a quartz composition
layer with this composition and blam,
it's in there.
Going down the road in the future,
we kind of want to make this even easier.
You know, it should be possible to just
have a QC view that's in a view
hierarchy for which you happen
to enable layer backed rendering.
And AppKit should
automatically know what to do,
you know, what kind of special layer to
create and how to configure it.
But right now,
you can even sort of kludge this in
right now just with what's on your seed.
So some neat stuff is
going to be possible now.
If we could go back to the
slides just for a wrap up.
So where can you learn
more about this stuff?
There's some draft
documentation that's available.
Or it's called LayerKit still.
Okay, the author has just reminded
me that this is called,
so look for LayerKit overview
and LayerKit reference available,
I think, via the ADC site and for
download from the WWDC site.
And also, please read the Leopard
AppKit release notes for this talk
specifically and also in general.
There are a bunch of notes there
about the new animation functionality
and should serve as a pretty
good quick start guide for you
to start experimenting with this.
The source code for this sample
we intend to make available soon.
It's been really hard for
me to stop playing around
with it and adding new stuff.
This adding the quartz composition,
I did that on the train this morning.
I was just like, well,
maybe we could just get that working too,
you know, and it was easy to do.
I added five lines of
code and it just worked.
So I'm going to try to
stop futzing with it.
We're going to try to get it
published very shortly so you
can look at how this is all done.
And finally, since we are using the
LK Animations in the AppKit API,
it might be useful for you to take a look
at the Quartz Core framework headers,
just a few of them,
specifically LKAnimation.h, LKTiming.h,
and if you want LKLayer.h,
there are a lot of comments in the
headers that will help give you
more detail about how these things
work and when to use which kind and
so forth and how to configure them.
So hopefully this has been helpful.
For more information,
you can contact Derek Horn,
who's our Application Frameworks
Evangelist.
And lastly, just some take-home points,
if you remember nothing
else from this session.
The key idea I want to get across here is
that to take advantage of this powerful
new core animation functionality,
there's no need to re-architect
your user interfaces,
maybe a little refactoring of where you
put your static and dynamic content.
But in general,
there's no need to rebuild your UIs.
You can work with layers
directly if you want to,
but there's also no need to be
aware that they even exist or
that AppKit is auto-managing them.
So what I'm showing you,
except for swapping in that
Quartz Composition layer,
has no idea that there's any
of this layer stuff going on.
It just does set once layer
yes for the root view,
and AppKit takes care of the rest.
So it's all very automatic.
We've tried to make it very automatic,
while also providing you the opportunity
to override behavior where you want to.
So keep designing great UI using views,
and let AppKit help you
animate them efficiently.